Instructions to Reviewers
Deciding Whether to Review a Manuscript
Conflict of Interest. Reviewers should not accept to review a manuscript if
1. A personal or financial conflict of interest exists.
2. The reviewer is currently collaborating with the author or has collaborated with the author within the
past 5 years.
3. The reviewer feels he or she cannot give an impartial and objective review, free from professional or
personal bias.
If you have questions regarding a potential conflict of interest, please contact the handling editor, and he/she
will decide whether it is appropriate to review the manuscript.
If a conflict of interest does not exist, please consider whether you can complete the review within 10 days.
There are occasions where a reviewer may be unable to complete his/her review within the allotted time
due to unforeseen circumstances. In this case, please contact the editor immediately so that
arrangements can be made for the review to be completed in a timely fashion.
Peer Review Process
If you realize that a conflict of interest exists after the review process begins, please notify the handling
editor immediately, so another reviewer can be solicited to review the manuscript.
Ethical Responsibilities During the Review Process
1. Confidentiality - The reviewer should maintain confidentiality about the existence and substance of the
manuscript. It is inappropriate to share the manuscript or to discuss it in detail with others before
publication. There are some exceptions, if approved by the editor. One example is that the reviewer may
ask a colleague to collaborate on a review. However, your collaborator on the review should also agree
to maintain confidentiality, and the editor should be informed of the participation of this additional
person.
2. Reviewer Conduct -. As stated in the Uniform Requirements (http://www.icmje.org/#peer), “Reviewers
must not use knowledge of the work, before its publication, to further their own interests.” Knowledge
of the content of confidential manuscripts should not be used for any other purpose unrelated to the
reviewing of the manuscript.
3. Reporting Concerns - The reviewer also has the responsibility of noting any ethical concerns, not
limited to but including suspected duplicate publication, fraud, plagiarism, or ethical concerns about the
use of animals or humans in the research being reported.
Constructing a Review
1. Rating a manuscript - In this section of the review form, the reviewer ranks the 1)
Novelty/Originality, 2) Scientific Importance/Impact, 3) Adequacy of Methods/Experimental
Design, 4) Quality of Data/Presentation Results, and 5) Overall Scientific Priority of the
manuscript based on the following scale:
Top 10 % = High Priority
Top 20% = Somewhat High Priority 
Top 30% = Average Priority
Upper 50% = Somewhat Low Priority
Lower 50% = Low Priority
N/A = Does not apply to this paper
Manuscripts rated in the upper 20% are more likely to be accepted for publication. The reviewer
also makes a recommendation for publication.
Indicate whether you have any concerns regarding the statistical analysis used or if there are any
ethical considerations.
2. In confidential comments to the Editor - Summarize your reasons for your rating and
recommendations. Provide specific comments regarding the original aspects of the work and its
importance.
3. In comments to the Author - The comments to the author should not include any statements
that indicate to the author your judgment as to the acceptability of the paper for publication.
These comments should be stated in a constructive and helpful way. The reviewer should
discuss the shortcomings and/or strengths of a study. Include in your critique your judgment of
1) originality and scientific importance, 2) adequacy and length of the title, 3) adequacy of the
abstract, 4) introduction, rationale and clarity of hypothesis, 5) adequacy of experimental design
and methods, 6) quality of data and presentation of results, including figures, 7) appropriateness
of the authors’ interpretation of their data, 8) length and appropriateness of the discussion, and 9)
inclusion of recent and appropriate references. If possible, make specific recommendations for
revisions. 