
Information for Reviewers

Peer review is a critical factor in promoting the rigor and high quality of scientific research. The entire scientific community benefits when the peer-review process is timely, thorough, and balanced. The editors of Cell Press greatly appreciate the tremendous collective contribution that reviewers make to our journals and the articles they publish. We hope that the guidelines described below will help facilitate peer review as a conversation between authors and reviewers, and as an essential element of the publication process.

Reviewer invitations for Cell press journals are sent out by email from the Editorial Manager (EM) system. The invitation includes information about the title and abstract of the manuscript and an indication of the time frame in which we would like to receive the review. After agreeing to review the paper, the reviewer has access to the entire manuscript. Once referees submit their reviews, they will have access to the comments provided by the other reviewers as well. We encourage reviewers to contact the editorial office at any time if they require additional information or assistance.

The content of the review

The core of any review is an objective assessment of both the technical rigor and the novelty of the presented work. Key features of a review include

    an outline of the conceptual advance over previously published work,
    a specific recommendation,
    the reasons for that recommendation, and
    a summary of the specific strengths and weaknesses of the paper. In this regard, we encourage referees to comment on the quality and presentation of the figures as well as the validity of the statistical methods used to interpret them. (If necessary, the editors can obtain primary data from the authors for referees’ use in these more detailed evaluations.)


Some other issues that are often useful to discuss include

    alternative hypotheses that are consistent with the available data,
    the paper’s potential audience (i.e., the relevant fields within the readership of the journal), and
    balanced referencing of the pre-existing literature. In particular, when previously published work has undercut the novelty of the present findings, it is extremely helpful to include in the body of the review detailed citation of the relevant articles and data.


Cover comments to the editors

If some specific aspects of the report seem inappropriate for presentation to the authors, they can be sent as comments for the editors’ eyes only. However, all general concerns that impact the reviewer’s overall recommendation should be indicated clearly in the comments to the author as well, not just in the comments to the editor. This includes but is not limited to concerns about the level of conceptual advance or significance. In general, the tone of the comments to the authors should be consistent with the tone of the comments to the editors. From the authors’ point of view, the final editorial decision should be a direct reflection of the reviewer comments that they receive.

A more general context in which comments to the editor can aid the editorial process is as an executive summary of the comments to the authors. In addition, this is an appropriate place to discuss any suspicions of ethical violations—either in the research itself or in the manner in which it is presented. Such issues might include suspected data manipulation or fraud, plagiarism, duplicate publications, or unethical treatment of animals or research subjects.

Reviews can and should be critical, but we ask reviewers to keep in mind that dismissive language and personalized criticisms may be viewed as reflecting bias or ulterior motives on the part of the referee.

A timely and efficient review process benefits the entire scientific community and is therefore a key editorial goal of the Cell Press journals. In most cases, Cell Press journals consider ten days to be sufficient time to review a manuscript. However, we do appreciate that reviewers juggle a number of priorities. If a referee is willing to review the paper but would require more than ten days to do so, we ask that s/he contact the editorial office. It is important to inform the editor when a review is likely to be late; a revised estimate of the time until submission of the review and an explanation for the unexpected delay are invariably helpful.

It is important to preserve the objectivity of peer review and public confidence in its rigor and impartiality. For this reason, we ask reviewers to be sensitive to the potential for conflicts of interest, both real and perceived. If any potential impediment to objectivity may exist, reviewers should either decline to review the paper or, in cases when they are uncertain, contact the editor for advice. It is certainly worth considering these issues if a manuscript (a) originates from an author who has recently had close personal interactions (of a strongly positive or negative nature) with the reviewer, (b) is identical to some subset of the reviewer’s currently active research program, or (c) impacts a topic in which the reviewer has a financial interest. For example, if the reviewer is collaborating with one of the authors or is preparing to publish a paper that comes to conclusions that overlap those of the manuscript in question, s/he should decline to review it. These issues should be considered as thoroughly as possible based on the initial “Request to Review” e-mail, which contains the author list, title, and abstract of the paper. On occasion, the initial “Request to Review” e-mail does not convey all the relevant information, and the potential conflict of interest is therefore not apparent until the referee agrees to review the paper and downloads the complete manuscript. In this situation, the referee should contact the editor immediately.

In addition, reviewers may not use the unpublished information described in manuscripts they are reviewing as resources for their own research interests. Likewise, these data, methods, or hypotheses should not influence financial decisions, such as buying or selling stocks. Information that has already been presented as an abstract, at a conference, or in another publication is considered public knowledge and does not require this privileged treatment.

Reviewers must preserve the confidentiality of unpublished work. Any manuscript or abstract sent for peer review is a confidential document and remains so until it is formally published. In some instances, reviewers may feel that it would be helpful to obtain additional advice from a colleague. In such cases, we ask that the reviewer contact the editor in advance to ensure that the editor has the opportunity to take additional information into account before permitting communications that have the potential to violate confidentiality. It is not appropriate to discuss unpublished manuscripts at laboratory meetings or journal clubs. Reviewers can collaborate with trainees (graduate students and post-docs) in the evaluation of manuscripts, and we appreciate that such collaboration functions as an important training exercise. However, we ask that reviewers keep the number of collaborators to a minimum and include the identities of all the individuals involved in the “comments to the editors” component of their review. Regardless, the person originally invited to review the manuscript is ultimately responsible for maintaining confidentiality and for the content and accuracy of the report. We encourage referees to inform collaborating reviewers about appropriate guidelines and ethics for peer review, as outlined in this document.

Cell Press will not disclose any reviewer’s identity except at the specific reviewer’s request. The editorial offices will not confirm or deny any author queries related to reviewer identity; reviewers are encouraged to adopt a similar policy and to refrain from discussing with the authors any manuscript under active consideration. If an author contacts a reviewer, that reviewer should feel free to notify the editor.

Reviewing (or re-reviewing) revised manuscripts

For the sake of editorial consistency and fairness to the authors, we request that referees who agree to review one version of a given manuscript also commit to reviewing future revisions if necessary. In an effort to minimize the resulting burden, we make every effort to handle revisions editorially and to curtail unproductive resubmission cycles.

Navigating the online Editorial Manager website

Cell Press Journals use Editorial Manager (EM), an online submission and review web application, to coordinate the editorial process. Upon receiving an invitation to review a manuscript, the reviewer logs on to the website to accept or decline the invitation. Once a reviewer has agreed to review a manuscript, s/he will then be given access to download the entire manuscript as a PDF from the EM site. When the reviewer is ready to submit his/her comments, s/he will revisit this site to copy and paste those comments. In order to ensure that each element of the review is directed appropriately (e.g., to the editors vs. the authors), it is best to submit all comments via the online system rather than via e-mail. Once the review is submitted, EM also allows the reviewer to view the other reviewers’ comment to the authors. The editorial office is available to answer all queries related to the review process, including the online EM.

Some tips about using the EM website as a reviewer:

When you enter your username and password, click on the “Reviewer Login” button. In most cases, pressing the “Enter” key will log you in by default as an author—in “Author” mode, the EM website will not display the manuscripts you are invited to review.

EM conducts all communication via e-mail. Therefore, when you register for the first time (as author or reviewer), or when you move your lab to a new institution, please double check the EM website to make sure that your e-mail address is updated and correct.

After you have saved your comments online, be sure to hit the “Proceed” button to ensure that they are sent to the editorial office.

Several functions of the EM website (including the ability to download revised manuscripts) are blocked by most pop-up blockers, so those pop-up blockers should be turned off while you are using EM.

If you have difficulty in using the blue link (at the top of the relevant page in the PDF) to download the high-resolution version of a Figure, try holding down the Shift key while clicking on the link.

The EM website preserves reviewer anonymity. Your identity as a referee is only revealed to you and the editors; it is not displayed to anyone else (e.g., other reviewers or authors).

If you are concerned that your username or password is too idiosyncratic to remember easily or that it is too simple to provide adequate security, please feel free to change either or both of them. If you have difficulty in doing so, please contact the editorial offices, and we will be glad to do it for you.

The EM website does not yet have the capacity to incorporate images or symbols into the body of a review.
