Reviewers
Reviewers (referees) are subject area experts who are asked to evaluate an article.
Their responsibilities are to:

provide a detailed, objective report on the merits of an article;

identify flaws in the design of the research, and in the analysis
and interpretation of results;

highlight ethical concerns;

comment on the appropriateness of the literature cited; and

offer their view on the suitability of an article for publication in the journal
to which it has been submitted

Invitation
When invited to review an article there are a few key questions to consider before
accepting the invitation:

Does the subject area of the article match my expertise?

Do I have time to review within the timescale requested by the journal?
Many journals ask for articles to be reviewed within 2-3 weeks, although others
request shorter turnaround times. Be realistic!

Do I have any conflicts of interest that might prohibit me from reviewing the
article objectively? (See also Publication ethics.)

Do I actually want to review this article?
If there are any reasons for declining the invitation respond straight away. It is OK
to say no, and better – for you, the journal and the authors – than not replying to an
invitation or committing only half-heartedly, procrastinating over the review and
submitting it late or not at all.
If you want to review the article, it is important to commit the time needed to
make it a thorough review. Should you find circumstances arise whereby your
review will be late or you are no longer able to honour your commitment, inform the
editorial office at your earliest opportunity.

Basic principles
Having agreed to review there are some basic principles to follow:

Always treat the paper with the utmost confidentiality

Take an objective, independent approach to the work, putting aside subjective
feelings about the topic and the authors, if known to you

Be attentive to the task as your report will influence the decision on the article,
which may have an impact on the career of the author(s) or the reputation of
the journal

Your role is to improve the science in scholarly publications and critical
scrutiny of the article is essential

Provide evidence, where appropriate, for the statements you make in your report

Be careful when writing a report to use simple language so that authors can
understand your comments, even if English is not their first language

Always conduct the review professionally, courteously, collegially and politely

Never contact the authors directly; all correspondence should be via the editorial
office
How to get started
If you have not reviewed for a particular journal before, read the aims and scope of
the journal and consult the reviewer guidelines. Also look at the form the journal asks
reviewers to complete to find out which questions you are expected to answer and
the specific issues that you are being asked to comment upon.
The majority of your report will be free-text comments to the authors and
confidential comments to the editor.
Before looking in detail at each section in the article,
read it from start to finish:

this will give you an overview and provide a clear understanding of everything the
article covers.
Writing the report
Overview comments
After reading the article it is useful to ask yourself the following questions:

Is there a clear and valid motivation for the study?

Is the research question/hypothesis/prediction of the research clearly
presented?


Does the research follow logically from prior knowledge? Is it timely, and does it
have the potential to advance the field?

Is the article appropriately structured and clearly presented?

Can you easily summarise the key message in the article?

Does the title reflect the contents and is it engaging?

Does the article fit with the scope of the journal that has asked you to review it?

Does it take account of relevant recent and past research in the field?

Is there significant overlap with material that has previously been published?
Your answers to these questions should form the opening comments in your report.
Detailed comments
Most articles are structured into sections commonly labelled ‘summary/abstract’,
‘introduction’, ‘methods’, ‘results’ and ‘discussion’. There may also be a ‘conclusion’.
It is recommended that you take a methodical approach to assessing the article by
appraising each section in turn. In your comments remember to provide evidence for
the statements you make, whether positive or negative.
Summary/abstract

Is it concisely written?

Does it provide a clear overview of the work?

Does it contain the essential facts from the paper?

Does the final point place the work described in a broader context, highlighting
its significance?
Introduction

Does this provide a clear, concise background to the study?

Does it enable you to understand the aims of the study and hypotheses
questions the authors are exploring?

Have the authors elaborated sufficiently on the context in which the work is set?

Has the motivation for the work been adequately explained?

Is there satisfactory citation of prior literature?

Methods

Is the methodology sound?

Have the procedures followed been sufficiently described?

Is there enough detail here for the study to be replicated?

Is it clear what was recorded and which units of measurement were used?

Are the statistical design and analyses appropriate?

Have important details been left out?

Where appropriate, has ethical approval been obtained for the work?
Results

Are the results provided in a form that is easy to interpret and understand?

Have results for all the questions asked been provided?

Are the data of sufficient quality and quantity?

Are the figures and tables appropriate?

Have the correct units of measurement been used?
Discussion and conclusions

Have the authors answered their research question(s)/hypotheses?

Are the conclusions drawn from the results justified?

Has the significance of the study been fully explained?

By how much has this study advanced the current understanding of the science?

Summary points

Be objective

Include details of what is good about the article, but also highlight any
problems

Look for the novelty and importance of the work

Recognize that no study is perfect

Be constructive

Be thorough and thoughtful

Evaluate both the quality of the ideas and experimental details/results

Be specific and factually accurate

Recognize opinion versus fact

Be civil

Post Review

Whenever possible agree to journal requests to review revisions or
resubmissions of articles you have previously reviewed. This helps provide
consistency of view and you are best placed to determine whether advice has
been followed.

Do not include anything that appears to be a decision about the paper in
your comments to the authors. The decision is made by the editors who need to
consider many criteria when deciding which papers to accept and reject.

As a courtesy to reviewers, most journals will copy the other reviewers’
comments to you. From these you will learn how different people review
papers and read comments about issues that you may have missed.

The journal will never reveal your identity to authors without your permission.
However, if you have signed your review and a dispute arises about a decision on
the article that you have reviewed, you should not enter into discussion with
authors, but advise them to contact the editorial office. The journal will follow
best practice guidelines (e.g. those provided by the Committee on Publication
Ethics (COPE)) in dealing with difficult and delicate situations. Journals do not
handle disputes over decisions often