Ethical Guidelines to Publication of Chemical Research
ACS Ethical Guidelines [PDF]
The Editors of journals published by the American Chemical Society provide a set of ethical guidelines for persons engaged in the publication of chemical research, specifically, for editors, authors, and manuscript reviewers. These guidelines were developed by the Editors of the journals published by the Publications Division of the ACS and are reviewed regularly to ensure their clarity.

The ACS Journals' Ethical Guidelines are offered from a conviction that the observance of high ethical standards is so vital to the whole scientific enterprise that a definition of those standards should be brought to the attention of all concerned.

Special Notes for Authors
CrossCheck LogoPlagiarism. In publishing only original research, ACS is committed to deterring plagiarism, including self-plagiarism. ACS Publications uses CrossCheck's iThenticate software to screen submitted manuscripts for similarity to published material. Note that your manuscript may be screened during the submission process. Further information about plagiarism can be found in Part B of the Ethical Guidelines to Publication of Chemical Research. See also the Press Release regarding ACS' participation in the CrossCheck initiative.

Conflict of Interest Disclosure. During manuscript submission, ACS journal authors are required to disclose the nature of any competing and/or relevant financial interest. A statement describing any financial conflicts of interest or lack thereof is published with each manuscript. During the submission process, the corresponding author must provide this statement on behalf of all authors of the manuscript. The statement should describe all potential sources of bias, including affiliations, funding sources, and financial or management relationships, that may constitute conflicts of interest. The statement will be published in the final article. If no conflict of interest is declared, the following statement will be published in the article: "The authors declare no competing financial interest."

Coauthor Notification. During manuscript submission, the submitting author must provide contact information (full name, email address, institutional affiliation and mailing address) for all of the coauthors. The author who submits the manuscript for publication accepts the responsibility of notifying all coauthors that the manuscript is being submitted. Deletion of an author after the manuscript has been submitted requires a confirming letter to the Editor-in-Chief from the author whose name is being deleted.

Information for Reviewers
Reviewers should give estimates of the scientific value of the work, together with some basis for their opinion. They should indicate whether the writing is clear, concise, and relevant. Personal comments should be avoided. Reviewers should realize that their reports may be transmitted by the authors to editors of other ACS journals.

