Guidance Notes for Reviewers of manuscripts submitted to
Hydrology Research: an International Journal
Different types of paper are published in HR: Research Papers, Invited Papers,
Comments (on a Research Paper) and Responses (by Authors to Comments). These
Guidance Notes are concerned mostly with Research Papers and complement the
online Reviewer Tutorial, which helps with the process of uploading reviews. We do
not want to be over-prescriptive for experienced Reviewers; they will know what
makes a good research paper. However, even experienced Reviewers may find some
of the following points useful reminders. We hope less-experienced Reviewers will
find the Guidance Notes useful. Feedback from Reviewers is welcome.
Reviewers are encouraged to look at the Instructions to Authors. If Authors have
departed from the Instructions the Reviewer is requested to draw attention to this in
their review. Looking at things from the opposite direction, Authors are encouraged to
look at these Guidance Notes to help them self-assess their written work from a
detached perspective and be mindful of what Reviewers (and readers of the journal)
may be looking for in a good, well-written, interesting paper.
As an international journal, Hydrology Research welcomes manuscripts from all over
the world. Irrespective of the English language competency of the Corresponding or
lead Author, Reviewers are encouraged to comment on the quality of the written
English in submitted manuscripts and to recommend rejection if it is not, in their
opinion, (a) adequate to enable a review to their satisfaction or (b) good enough for
publication. Most cases of manuscripts where the written English is clearly not to the
required standard should be filtered-out by the Editors (rejected without review) but
some such cases may reach Reviewers. Where the Author (or at least one of the
Authors where there is more than one) is known to have a high English language
competency the Reviewer should expect the written English to be excellent. Most
Reviewers are willing to correct a few small errors in, and suggest a few
improvements to, the written English of a manuscript if required. Any help a
Reviewer wishes to give the Author(s) towards improving the written English is
welcome (additional uploaded annotated manuscripts by Reviewers can be helpful to
Authors) but there is no expectation on the Reviewer for substantial, time-consuming,
inputs of this nature – the quality of the written English is the responsibility of the
Author(s).
Reviewers are requested to check that the manuscript has been written for an
international audience. Phrases and terms that are well understood locally but not
necessarily internationally should be defined for the international reader. The
manuscript should be of interest internationally (at least regionally) even if the study
topic and objectives are related to a specific small catchment or field study area.
Comments on the Title and Abstract are always welcome. When a Title is in the form
of a question that question must be explicitly addressed and answered in the paper.
The Abstract should say what the paper does and achieves (including some of the
most important results). The Abstract should not include introductory text. The
Introduction should skilfully and succinctly set the scene for what follows, placing the
work to be presented in the context of relevant published work. 
Throughout the manuscript, citations (especially self-citations) should not be
gratuitous and they must be preceded by “e.g.” when appropriate. Long lists of
citations are discouraged. Citations should be to English language publications from a
variety of sources (including Hydrology Research, when appropriate), directing the
Reviewer (and the reader generally) to further relevant reading. There should be a
good number of citations of recent publications. The number of citations of
conference proceeding publications should not be more than about one to every
fifteen journal papers cited. All publications listed in the References should be readily
available internationally. There must be a Reference for each unique citation, and
there must not be any publication listed in the References that does not have at least
one citation in the text.
The structure of the manuscript should be such that any unnecessary repetition of
information, reasoning or argument is avoided. Manuscripts should be self-contained
to the extent that it is not essential for the reader to consult other publications to
follow the arguments presented. However, some level of prior knowledge on the part
of the reader has to be assumed by Authors, so the required degree of selfcontainment
is a matter of judgement by Reviewers. The Reviewer is asked to
consider that readers wishing to learn from a published paper may not have a level of
expertise in the subject area as high as the Reviewer’s. Reviewers are requested to
report cases of cut-and-paste of text, etc, from published papers. The Editors
welcome assistance from Reviewers in the detection and reporting of any form of
plagiarism.
The narrative style should be consistent throughout. When referring to actions,
decisions, views, etc, by or of the Authors, terms like “I”, “we” and “our” are strongly
discouraged. The third person narrative style should be used consistently throughout.
Manuscripts should include sufficient information to allow independent reproduction
of the results presented. This information should include details about the nature of,
and access to, data and techniques employed that are not included explicitly in the
main text or in Appendices.
The work submitted for publication should have novel aspects. These should be clear
from the manuscript, and the Reviewer should be satisfied that the claim(s) for
novelty are reasonable and justified.
A good Research Paper offers new insights arising from the work presented. It can
also offer views and suggestions concerning where the work leaves the topic, future
work required, etc. With these points in mind, a Research Paper should be more than a
report written for a small audience or a specific commissioning body. 