Criteria for publication
The ISME Journal receives many more submissions than it can publish each month. It is therefore important that manuscripts are critically evaluated for compliance with the following criteria:

strong evidence for the conclusions that are drawn
novelty (abstracts, meeting reports and www preprints are not considered to compromise novelty)
broad biological significance
importance to the specific field
Top of page
The review process
All submitted manuscripts are assessed by the editor(s) for suitability for the review process. The views of an Advisory Editorial Board member may be sought for further input towards this decision.

Manuscripts that are sent for formal review typically go to multiple referees. Based on their advice, the editor decides to:

accept the manuscript, with or without minor revision
invite the authors to revise the manuscript to address specific concerns before a final decision is reached
or reject the manuscript, typically on grounds of specialist interest, lack of novelty, insufficient conceptual advance or major technical and/or interpretational problems.
Referees may recommend a particular course of action in their confidential comments to the editor, but should bear in mind that the editors may have to make a decision based on conflicting advice. Furthermore, editorial decisions are not a matter of counting votes or numerical rank assessments, but rather are based on an evaluation of the strengths of the arguments raised by each referee and by the authors. The most useful referee reports, therefore, are those that set out clear, substantiated arguments and refrain from recommending a course of action in the comments directed to the authors.

Referees may, on occasion, be asked for further advice, particularly in cases where they disagree with one another, or where the authors believe that they have been misunderstood on points of fact. This kind of discussion is sometimes necessary to provide an effective and fair review process. We do understand, however, that referees are reluctant to be drawn into prolonged disputes, so we try to keep consultation to the minimum we judge necessary to come to a fair conclusion. In certain cases, additional referees or members of our Advisory Editorial Board may be consulted to resolve disputes, but this is avoided unless there is a specific issue on which further advice is required.

Top of page
Selecting referees
Referee selection is critical to the review process, and our choice is based on many factors, including expertise, reputation, specific recommendations, and our previous experience with the referee. We avoid using referees who are chronically slow, sloppy, too harsh or too lenient. We invite referees and only on acceptance of the invitation will a referee have access to the full paper.