Briefing for Peer Reviewers
Before starting ensure that you are free from any conflicts of interest and that you’re aware of our confidentiality requirements.
Assess the paper with reference to the principles of peer review.  If you have concerns about the paper that are outside the scope of these principles either include them in your confidential comments or contact jan.mciver@la-press.com, who will forward them to the Editor in Chief or Associate Editor responsible for the editorial decision.
Your review must be a minimum of one large paragraph in length and must demonstrate full and objective critical engagement with the paper. 
Don’t include explicit statements on whether the paper should be published or not in the text of your review.  A separate part of the review submission webpage is provided for your publishing recommendation. 
Failure to meet the requirements listed here and in any emails sent to you may result in your review not being used by the Editor in Chief or Associate Editor responsible for the editorial decision on the paper.
Principles of Peer Review
Peer reviewers are asked to provide thoughtful and unbiased feedback to authors to ensure that the conclusions of papers are valid and supported by the data and manuscripts achieve reasonable standards of scholarliness and intelligibility.  Reviewers should focus on the science of the paper.  Principles of peer review are outlined in greater depth below:
Scientific Quality and Credibility
The arguments and conclusions of the paper under review should be valid and supported by data reported in the paper or referenced in other papers.  The paper under review should be of a tone appropriate to a scientific journal. Papers should not be penalised for reporting negative research findings. 
Readability and Presentation
The paper under review should read without difficulty. If the paper under review reads badly you should recommend copy editing as a condition of acceptance.
Referencing and Plagiarism
All submissions to Libertas journals are scanned using iThenticate.  However no scanner is entirely accurate and none can detect some sophisticated forms of plagiarism, such as plagiarism of ideas, so we ask reviewers to be vigilant for this when reviewing the manuscript. If you detect what you believe to be plagiarised material please email jan.mciver@la-press.com before proceeding further with your review.  Instances of plagiarism we are notified of during peer review are forwarded to the Editor in Chief or Associate Editor, who will determine how to proceed. 
We do not consider publication of a scientific poster or deposition of a pre-print in an archive by the same authors to constitute plagiarism.
Suitability for the Journal
The paper under review should fit comfortably within the aims and scope of the journal it has been submitted to. It should not be likely to bring the journal into disrepute should it be published owing to the paper's content or the content of other papers published elsewhere by the same author(s).
Validation of Data
Results should be capable of being reproduced, except in areas of genuinely novel research, where issues may be raised in papers of otherwise good quality which cannot immediately be resolved and absolutely rigorous validation of data may therefore not be possible.
Disqualified Content
Papers under review containing content that is unscholarly or regarded by most reasonable people as psuedo-science are not acceptable for publication under any circumstances.  If the paper under review contains any such material declare it in your review and recommend rejection.  Some disqualified content is listed below but the list is not exhaustive.
Homeopathy
Creation science
Supernatural phenomena and UFOs
Ethical Considerations
Libertas requires authors to confirm that they have complied with applicable ethical requirements around identifiable human subjects and experiments involving humans and animals, both when their paper is submitted and prior to publication.  Editorial decision makers (Editors in Chief or Associate Editors) also look closely at these matters.  If you have concerns about these areas you may add them to your peer review report.
Integrity of images
Do any images presented with the manuscript give the appearance of having been manipulated in violation of the guidelines given here?
Publishing Recommendation
Reviewers may optionally include a publishing recommendation.  Publishing decisions are made by the editor in chief or associate editor on the basis of their own and the peer reviewers' evaluations of the paper under review.  
Completion Deadline
The deadline for completion of your peer review is in the email you were sent inviting you to undertake the review.
Confidentiality
All peer reviews are carried out as blind peer reviews.  The identity of the peer reviewers must never be disclosed to the authors of the paper under review.  Libertas will take reasonable steps to keep your identity confidential. 
You may not disclose your identity to the authors of the paper under review before, during, or after your peer review.  Disclosure of your identity by you will result in your review not being used.  It may also lead to investigation under any applicable COPE rules and in some cases by your institution/employer.