Instructions to Reviewers
1. General  
Every scientific article submitted to Medical Dosimetry is peer&#8208;reviewed by individuals
selected for their knowledge of the topic of the article, and for their objectivity and
experience in assessing the scientific merit and clarity of presentation of submitted
publications. This section is directed towards appointed reviewers for appropriate and
professional effort.
The review should provide a critical and impersonal evaluation that includes suggestions
to be considered and actions to be taken to make the article acceptable for publication.
Remarks should provide both a general impression [General Comments] of the article
and specific suggestions [Specific Comments] for the article’s improvement. Both
categories of remarks may be shared anonymously with the Corresponding Author at
the discretion of the Associate Editor or Editor&#8208;in&#8208;Chief.  Each remark should be
numbered for ease of response from the Corresponding Author. The decision to accept,
reject or require revisions shall not be stated by the Reviewer. The Associate Editor and
Editor&#8208;in&#8208;Chief make this decision, and may over&#8208;ride the recommendation of the
Reviewer as deemed appropriate.
The Reviewer should also provide an overall appraisal of the article, and guidance
regarding its disposition in the form of Comments to the Associate Editor. These remarks
will not be shared with the Corresponding Author. It is here that a recommendation may
be provided to the Associate Editor on the decision to accept, reject or require revisions.
Again, this is a suggestion and not the decision.
If it is believed that the article is unworthy of publication in Medical Dosimetry, reasons
must be stated objectively, completely, and without prejudice. Critical comments are
important in a review but they must always be presented in a respectful manner.  
Please respond promptly to a request to serve as a Reviewer. Reviews must be
completed no later than 2 weeks from the date of invitation. If you are unable to meet
this requirement, please decline the invitation to review at your earliest opportunity so
a replacement reviewer can be identified. A Reviewer may request removal from the
Reviewer list at any time. If a Reviewer has been determined to decline requests for
review regularly, the Associate Editor and Editor&#8208;in&#8208;Chief have the right to remove the
person from the Reviewer List.
All reviews are completed electronically by following the link
http://ees.elsevier.com/meddos, which is also where articles to be reviewed are
accessed. The review process allows one to paste in a word document of the Review if
there is a preference to develop the review off&#8208;line. The review process is freeform, but
2
the evaluation should include comments regarding the manuscript’s accuracy,
originality, scientific completeness, clarity, succinctness of the writing, quality and
necessity of all illustrations and tables, comprehensiveness of the literary review, format
of the paper and references, relevance of the title and abstract, appropriateness of the
subject material to the journal, and any other issues you feel are important. In such
comments, please distinguish between suggestions for changes that may improve the
manuscript, and mandatory changes required to make the manuscript acceptable for
publication (if any exist).   
The article should present original, previously unpublished information. If there is
evidence to the contrary, the Reviewer should cite references that provide the evidence.
The Reviewer should be particularly alert to information in the article that might have
been taken from another publication without an appropriate reference.
Estimates and computations should be verified in the manuscript. Conclusions drawn
from data should be confirmed to be plausible. References should be pertinent to the
manuscript and expressed accurately and completely. It is the responsibility of the
Reviewer to be familiar with and address any issues relating to Corresponding Author
Guidelines that are not in accordance with journal policy. The Reviewer should cite the
policy where applicable.
The Reviewer should be alert to any negative comments by the Corresponding Author
towards the work of others; as such comments are not appropriate for articles in
Medical Dosimetry. The Reviewer should also guard against negative comments towards
the article under review; general and specific comments by the Reviewer can point out
shortcomings of an article without denigrating the article.  
It is not necessary for the Reviewer to identify misspellings, typographical errors or
grammatical misconstructions, unless these are technical in nature and might not be
picked up during the copyediting process. Routine misspellings and other grammatical
errors will be corrected by the Copy Editor. However, if the Reviewer believes that the
English needs to be improved, they may request the Corresponding Author to acquire
professional assistance, for which English is their first language, in reviewing the paper
before a revision is submitted (adapted from http://www.medphys.org/refguide.asp).
1. Decision Types – Criteria and Associated Actions
a. Accept
Criteria:
The manuscript meets all requirements for immediate publication. Manuscript
represents publication quality “As is”.
Action:
2
3
Manuscript will proceed directly to the publisher.
b. Accept/Minor Revision
Criteria:
Manuscript requires only minor changes or non&#8208;substantive
clarification/modification. Changes require only verification of compliance by
Associate Editor. The Reviewer does not have access to suggest modifications prior
to publication. The manuscript proceeds directly to the Medical Dosimetry Review
Board for Relevancy score.
Action:
Manuscript is returned to Author for minor revision. Upon resubmission, the
Author’s point&#8208;by&#8208;point responses to the reviewer comments are verified for
compliance. Once verified, the manuscript proceeds directly to the Medical
Dosimetry Review Board for Relevancy score.
c. Major Revision
Criteria:
The manuscript demonstrates deficiencies which require significant re&#8208;
work/modifications before a review can be considered further. The Corresponding
Author must address the Reviewers concerns and submit a manuscript revision. No
manuscript may receive this decision more than twice. (However, a decision of
rejection is mandatory.)
Action:
The manuscript is returned to the Corresponding Author for major revision. Upon
resubmission, the Corresponding Author’s point&#8208;by&#8208;point responses to the
Reviewer’s comments and the revised manuscript are returned to the Editor&#8208;in&#8208;Chief
for re&#8208;processing.
d. Reject
Criteria:
The manuscript does not meet the minimum publication criteria and demonstrates
weaknesses so egregious that modification to bring the manuscript into feasible
publication is not perceived possible, efficient or advantageous. This may be the
result of a manuscript having been found to (1) have been previous published/in
press, (2) provides absolutely no new or inventive data or procedures which add to
the current literature, or (3) is simply scientifically unsound.
Action:
3
4
The manuscript is returned to Author as rejected.  Decision considered final barring
appeal by Author.
e. Reject – Out of Scope
Criteria:
The subject matter of the submission does not fall within the scope of Medical
Dosimetry. Rejection is declared on this basis and is without prejudice. No statement
of quality will be rendered. Should a Reviewer recommend this decision, they need
only to state the reason why he/she believes the submission is out of scope. A full
review need not be performed.
Action:
The manuscript is returned to the Corresponding Author as “Rejected – Out of
Scope.. No appeal is permitted.