1.ÿDisinterested evaluation. Reviews should be objective assessments of the research. If you cannot judge a paper impartially, you should not accept it for review or you should notify the editor as soon as you appreciate the situation. If you have any professional or financial affiliations that may be perceived as a conflict of interest in reviewing the manuscript, or a history of personal differences with the author(s), you should describe them in your confidential comments. Likewise, if, as a reviewer, you believe that you are not qualified to evaluate a component of the research, you should inform the editor in your review
2.ÿConsiderate, useful comments. Reviews should be constructive and courteous and the reviewer should respect the intellectual independence of the author. The reviewer should avoid personal comments;ÿScience Translational Medicineÿreserves the right to edit comments that will hinder constructive discussion of manuscripts.
3.ÿTimeliness. Just as you wish prompt evaluations of your own research, please return your reviews within the time period specified when you were asked to review the paper. If events will prevent a timely review, please inform the editor at the time of the request.
4.ÿConfidentiality. The submitted manuscript is a privileged communication and must be treated as a confidential document. Please destroy all copies of the manuscript after review. Please do not share the manuscript with any colleagues without the explicit permission of the editor. Reviewers should not make personal or professional use of the data or interpretations before publication without the authors' specific permission (unless you are writing an editorial or commentary to accompany the article).
5.ÿAnonymity.ÿThe review process is conducted anonymously;ÿScience Translational Medicineÿnever reveals the identity of reviewers to authors. The privacy and anonymity provisions of this process extend to the reviewer, who should not reveal his or her identity to outsiders or members of the press. The review itself will be shared only with the author, and possibly with other reviewers and our Board
6. Editorial Policies. You should be aware ofÿScience Translational Medicine'sÿpoliciesÿfor authors regarding conflict of interest, data availability, and materials sharing.


